welcome to how to cook that I'm Ann
Reardon now misinformation about covert
19 seems to be spreading faster than the
virus itself so I thought we'd better do
some debunking here check out some viral
videos and see whether they are true
folks what's going on there so first of
all I thought we would tackle the topic
of hand sanitizer if you're like me then
your local supermarket shelves up pretty
much empty of hand sanitizer I know that
our supermarket said they restocked and
then they sold 40 weeks supply in one
week and so that's why the shelves are
empty again they're busy trying to get
more suppliers to put on those shelves
and that has led to a lot of people
searching for the term make hand
sanitizer they want to make their own
hand sanitizer if you take a look on
Google Trends here you can see that
worldwide searches for make hand
sanitizer were low really low until late
February when suddenly they spiked up
now blossom fest media was of course
straight onto this with a couple of new
videos ten hacks to help you stay clean
and ten surprising cleaning hexed
looking at the thumbnails let me start
by saying please don't ever cut with a
knife towards your hand for obvious
reasons but back to hand sanitizer okay
so they put three big chunks of aloe
vera and a splash of isopropyl alcohol
and a few drops of essential oils into a
blender to make easy hand sanitizer now
let's break that down the Center for
Disease Control in the USA or the CDC
says that hand sanitizer is effective if
it is at least 60% alcohol the more
alcohol the better but $0.64 like your
minimum you don't want to go under that
and the reason for that is of course is
that the alcohol is the thing in the
hand sanitizer that's doing the
sanitizing that's the thing that is
going to break down the virus and make
it inactive
if you don't have the alcohol in there
you're just making your hands wet
basically now if we look at the recipe
that they used here we can see that they
made a bottle full plus whatever was
left over in the blender there for this
to be 60% alcohol two-thirds of this
needed to be alcohol not just a splash
so this one is not going to have a high
enough alcohol concentration in it to be
effective against covert 19 I did a
quick search on YouTube for DIY hand
sanitizer and the first result that came
up the one that was at the top was a
video by this lady who used 70%
isopropyl alcohol and aloe vera gel now
she's trying to do the right thing she
actually talks about the CDC's
recommendation of it being at least 60%
but she's getting confused there and
thinking that the alcohol you use has to
be at least 60% so let's see what
happens if we follow this recipe you can
see here she's using a popular recipe
with 1/3 of a cup of aloe vera gel - 2/3
of a cup of isopropyl alcohol but her as
a propyl alcohol is 70% not 99% if you
want to make hand sanitizer at home and
you take 2/3 of a cup of 99% isopropyl
alcohol and mix it with aloe vera gel
you will get a hand sanitizer that is 66
percent alcohol which according to the
CDC is effective against coronavirus so
that's a good one if you instead of
using 99% alcohol use 70 percent
isopropyl alcohol that the lady did in
the video it's already watered down so
then adding 2/3 of a cup of that and 1/3
a cup of aloe vera gel gives you a hand
sanitizer that's only 46 percent alcohol
which according to the CDC is not enough
it's under 60% so it's not going to be
effective against covert 19 so it has to
be 60 percent of the end result not off
the thing you're starting with that's
how it works so hopefully that makes
sense now let's look at disinfecting
surfaces next so there was a recent
study published by the New England
Journal of Medicine
and this looked at how long covert 19
could survive on different surfaces at
room temperature so they put some on
different surfaces and then tested it
over various hour intervals to see was
it still viable
now viable means it's still able to
infect someone so this is important to
know so if we have a look at that they
tested it on copper and on copper it
lasted for up to four hours cardboard 24
hours plastics and steel up to three
days so how are we going to disinfect
those surfaces well if we watch the same
video from Blossom it shows us how to
make a disinfectant spray using 70%
isopropyl alcohol which as you know from
before is watered down already so it's
part of cold part water plus a lot of
vinegar all right so we already know
that that's not going to have anywhere
near enough alcohol content in it to
kill coronavirus because you watered it
down a lot with the vinegar but what
about the acid from the vinegar well the
acid in the vinegar is a fairly weak
acid it's true it is put up against some
bacterias but bacteria is not a virus so
we have to look at is it going to work
for this particular virus because to be
honest that's what we're concerned about
right now is the virus dr. Evans a
professor in Medical Microbiology and
immunology says no some strong acids are
effective but vinegar is too weak so if
you spray your door handle with this
vinegar mixture and then wipe it off
you're not actually going to deactivate
any coronavirus that's on there if you
go to the EPA website and I'll link to
that below this video there is a list of
all the different disinfectants what the
active ingredients are in them and
whether they're effective against covert
19 or not now interestingly enough if
you look at that website you'll see some
of them need to be in contact with the
virus for 10 minutes to be effective
some are only one minute
but generally you can't just spray it on
and wipe it off straight away you have
to spray it on and leave it for 10
minutes because it needs to sit on there
enough to make that virus inactive now
we are of course being told as I said to
regularly disinfect our phones because
we use them a lot and they go to our
face so it's pretty important that they
are clean and that they're not
contaminated let's see what they suggest
in this video for that if you're out of
hand sanitizer they say to clean your
phone mix together
water and vinegar which as you know now
is a weak acid that doesn't deactivate
the virus and there's zero alcohol in
this so there's nothing to deactivate
the virus you'd think in the middle of a
pandemic it would be really important to
fact-check
and get this stuff right because
people's lives are at risk
obviously not high on their list of
priorities I guess let's hope that
people know not to follow these DIYs
let's look at some of the comments
underneath I think we might be in a bit
of trouble here people are here this
ain't in here because of greater virus
so they're wanting information of what
to do well that's an interesting comment
by folks to try and give you the
information behind that to try and
combat misinformation on YouTube about
coronavirus you should made a decision
to demonize any videos who were
predominantly about covert 19 so ones
like this sort of thing then they change
their mind a few days later and said
that news channels would be able to
monetize and specific other channels
would but the majority wouldn't so Fox
is arson because this has gone up in
that time period of demonetized how come
this video is still monetized well it's
interesting if you look at it they
haven't mentioned covert 19 or
coronavirus in the title what they've
done instead is just put the graphic
that the news always uses on the
thumbnail and use that in the video as
well so they've implied it without
saying it in order to not get the video
D monetized an interesting way of going
around that okay moving on so
disinfectants look at the APA list so
you know which ones will work hand
sanitizer at least 60% alcohol in the
final
not in the ingredients so a big question
that I get is about food and other
things that come into your house because
obviously if yourself isolating you're
like okay so if a parcel arrives is that
going to have coronavirus on it
obviously if it can survive on cardboard
for 24 hours it could do so if we have a
look at the current advice doctor Justin
Clark who has researched bacterial and
viral pathogens for 10 years he says if
you want to be super safe then the best
thing to do is to quarantine anything
that comes into your home for 2 to 3
days so you can just leave it to one
side for two to three days and then use
it so if you get a box delivered
probably it was packed more than two or
three days ago if it's been in transit
for that time so you could unpack it
wash your hands dispose of the box and
then wash your hands and what's inside
is probably fine
but stuff like groceries you can't
always set that aside for two to three
days sometimes one you need to eat it
just sometimes - it's going to be
perishable so it's not going to be okay
so what about food let's look at some of
the things that we do to food and what
effect that has on the virus let's start
with what happens when you put it in the
fridge now they haven't studied this for
over 19 but they have studied it for
other coronaviruses and they've found by
putting it in the fridge it allows it to
remain active for longer up to weeks
so what about freezing it does that
destroy it no it's able to be frozen
defrosted frozen defrosted several times
and still be active so freezing is not
the solution so what about heating it up
if we go the other way
well it's generally agreed that if you
have it at a hundred and 32 degrees
Fahrenheit or 55 degrees centigrade for
30 minutes it will inactivate covered 19
now my immediate question is can I do it
hotter for less time and there's no
Studies on that so we don't know you
would assume that would be the case but
there's no actual study that will tell
you yes or no but importantly at this
stage
there is no recorded cases of someone
getting covert 19 through eating food so
don't be terribly fearful about eating
food of course wash or your fresh
produce make sure you give it a good
rinse under the tap before you eat it
don't try and pour us a propyl alcohol
or detergents on them because a lot of
them are not good for you they're not
edible and don't whatever you do don't
try and drink isopropyl alcohol or
detergent some people have done that
that is terribly bad for you and will
land you in hospital because that's
potentially gonna kill you don't do that
let's move on to washing your hands with
soap now you can use any soap the CDC
says you do not need to use
antibacterial soap which of course makes
sense because that is antibacterial
covert 910 is a virus not a bacteria so
when I say you can use any soap I
literally mean any soap that you like so
you can use a really pretty nice so if
you've got sensitive skin you can use
something like these goat soaps the
reason why that is like it seems a bit
counterintuitive because you have to
have at least 60% alcohol in your hand
sanitizer you have to use the right
disinfectants and leave it for the right
amount of time but you can use any soap
washing your hands for 20 seconds and
that will work the reason why that is is
a virus is a bit like a ball and now
outside of that ball there's a lipid
layer or a fat layer and if you use soap
when you're washing your hands it breaks
down that lipid layer so it basically
breaks open the ball and breaks it so it
makes the virus inactive and that's why
you can use any soap at all shout out to
a local business if you live here in
Australia you can order these soaps in
bulk online they're beautiful the goat
soap is very good if you have sensitive
skin because it's not harsh so if you're
washing your hands all the time and
having trouble with your skin jump
online and get one of those its natural
simplicity not a you I'll put a link to
that below anyway smells beautiful in
here on the topic of washing hands
finally blossom has done something good
yes
they actually have a hand-washing
demonstration that shows really well
their areas of your hands that we
usually miss when we just go like this
you need to actually interlock your
hands and from the back of course and
then you tend to miss your thumbs and
you tend to miss your fingertips so you
need to do all of those areas really
well of course they stole the idea from
someone else
it's been done by heaps of people before
them but it's an important message and
they got that one right so we're going
to give them a ticket least for that bit
moving on to face masks this is a hugely
debated topic in China it's forbidden to
go on the street without wearing a face
mask New York and in Los Angeles of
course have asked people to where the
cotton face mask this will be the look
so let me lead as mayor and places like
here in Australia we've been told don't
worry about it it doesn't make any
difference so what is the current
studies showing well if we go to a video
by the CDC the Center for Disease
Control in America a few weeks ago they
were saying EVC does not recommend use
of masks in the general community and
that's not a new recommendation that's
been a standing recommendation for some
time primarily because there's not a lot
of evidence that there's benefit we also
are concerned about the exposure of
hands to the face as we mentioned
earlier I've just anecdotal observation
not true scientific data I've watched
people in public who are wearing a mask
and how often they put their hand to
their face to adjust the mask or to push
it away from their eyes it really makes
me wonder if it actually may have a
negative benefit on the risk of
infection as well did I said not to wear
them and then a little while later they
said the CDC is advising the use of
non-medical cloth face covering as an
additional voluntary public health
measure so if this is voluntary I don't
think I'm gonna be doing it so it seems
like they changed them on it and it
seems like the president is saying that
he's not gonna wear one interesting
anyway let's look at
facts why is it that they might have
changed their mind the city see and
places like that are not tending to just
flip-flop because they've decided to
they'll probably be some new study so I
looked into that and there was a few
news stories about a study and all the
news stories saying that it proves that
masks don't work so I'm like okay well
that's weird because the CDC is not
going to tape in mind if they don't work
so I went back and found the actual
study what they had done in this study
and keep in mind it's only a very very
small sample of patients so usually
medical studies have to be hundreds of
patients in order for them to be
statistically significant but because
we're so short on data because it's such
a new virus that we're fighting even
small studies are useful at this stage
so what this study did was it got
different patients who had covered 19
that tested positive for it they
definitely had it and they got them
twenty centimeters away from a petri
dish in a vacuum sealed totally sterile
clean room without a mask on they
coughed five times then they got them to
put on a surgical mask and cough five
times then they got them to put on a
cotton mask and cough five times and
then just as a control they got them to
have no mask and cough five times again
now the results studied showed that on
the outside of both the cotton mask and
the surgical mask they could swab covert
910 particles so what that means is that
the virus is going through both of those
masks the virus is so tiny that it can
get through both the surgical masks when
someone coughs and the cotton mask so
that's why the news stories were saying
shows that wearing a mask is a waste of
time but none of them reported on the
results of what was on the petri dish so
from 20 centimeters away did it make any
difference or not so when I was looking
at those results if we have a look here
this is the average viral load on the
petri dish of the person coughing
without the mask then this is when they
have the surgical mask on this is with
the cotton mask and this is again
without a mask now from that it looks
like the two layer
mask was actually more effective in
reducing the viral load than the
surgical one was which I thought was
really interesting that was not what I
expected at all but it did still let the
virus through and when you're looking at
that you're going all that didn't reduce
it that much and from what we know of
the way this virus is spreading it seems
like you only need a very small amount
of the virus to be infected so it's
important that we try and stop it
getting out there all together now
clearly these masks are not going to
stop it getting out all together but it
is really important to note that this
table is in log values it's not just in
straight numbers so a log value like to
the log to the power of 10 is so that
you can compare very small numbers with
very large numbers on the same graph and
you can see them all so if I was to
expand this out into normal numbers and
not in log value you'd be able to see
the true difference that the mask made
in viral load if i zoom that out you can
see what that looks like
it is not stopping the virus getting out
there or getting through minute is
dramatically reducing it so that could
be why the CDC have changed their mind
and said wear a cotton mask when you're
out in public now to be clear this is
not to stop you from getting infected
it's to help stop you infecting other
people so if you're asymptomatic or even
if you're symptomatic to be symptomatic
you should be at home but if you're
asymptomatic and you go out to the shops
and you happen to cough or sneeze or
even breathing hopefully it's going to
reduce the amount of virus that gets out
there in the environment for other
people to then pick up now there are
some important things to remember with
this one is it was a very small study
only a very small sample of patients
with corona virus so they might be a
bigger study come out in a few weeks
time that might show some different
things or shed some different light on
things but for the moment this is the
information that we've got and the other
thing to remember is don't touch the
front of a mask whether you're wearing a
surgical one or whether you're wearing
the cotton one the virus does go through
and you get quite a concentration of it
on the front of the mask so if you touch
the front of the mask and then touch a
surface you are spreading that virus
around so if you're asymptomatic you
don't even know
SiC you could be spreading it to other
people so don't touch the front of the
mask also it's important not to be
touching it and constantly moving it
because then you are basically making it
worse for yourself if you're touching
something that is infected and then you
touch your face because you're trying to
do your mask that's not a good idea so
obviously as well remember that the
virus is still getting through those
masks so if you're in public and
everyone's wearing masks
you're not safe so don't suddenly go oh
it's fine I can be close to them no keep
your distance
if possible don't even go out stay at
home work from home if you can some of
us are blessed to work from home like me
so we don't have to go out try and do
your best to keep your distance
wash your hands make sure you wash it
properly getting everywhere 20 seconds
with soap or if you cannot get soap and
water then hand sanitizer with at least
60% alcohol and use an approved
disinfectant to disinfect your commonly
used areas I hope that helped dispel
some of the myths and explain some of
the science behind what is going on for
you so that you can make informed
decisions to protect yourself and your
loved ones from coronavirus I pray that
you're all safe I want to say a big
thank you to all of my patrons who
support me in this channel so that I can
upload videos like this regardless of
whether YouTube's going to mana ties it
or not - you guys are legends right
there on the screen
really appreciate that subscribe to how
to cook that and click on the
notification bell to be notified of near
videos
make it a great week and I'll see you on
Friday
[Music]
you